[Screenshot/The View]
Democratic New York City Mayor Zohran Mamdani confirmed on Tuesday that he supports abolishing Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).
During an appearance on “The View,” Mamdani accused ICE of “terrorizing” people and violating the law while disregarding people’s “humanity.” He has long condemned ICE and called on the agency to be held accountable, asserting that no one is above the law and that immigrants’ rights must be protected.
“I am in support of abolishing ICE, and I’ll tell you why,” Mamdani said. “Because what we see is an entity that has no interest in fulfilling its stated reason to exist. We’re seeing a government agency that is supposed to be enforcing some kind of immigration law, but instead what it’s doing is terrorizing people, no matter their immigration status, no matter the facts of the law, no matter the facts of the case. And I’m tired of waking up every day and seeing a new image of someone being dragged out of a car, dragged out of their home, dragged out of their life.” 
“What we need to see is humanity,” Mamdani continued. “And there is a way to care about immigration in this city and in this country with a sense of humanity. What we’re seeing from ICE is not it, and we have not seen that from them in a long, long time.” (RELATED: Mamdani’s Progressive Coalition Already Embroiled In Bitter Race War)
WATCH: 


Shortly after being elected mayor, Mamdani called on New Yorkers to obstruct ICE agents and argued that a “Warrant of Removal/Deportation” is invalid. He later doubled down on the move, stating that he was simply informing New Yorkers “of their rights.”
“I’m proud to inform people of their rights, and I can’t think of a more American thing to do than to speak about the protections that we all have under the law,” Mamdani said on Dec. 11.
Anti-ICE sentiments have escalated among Democrats since the death of Renee Good, who was shot by an ICE agent on Jan. 7 after she defied officers’ orders and hit him with her car in Minneapolis. In response, Mamdani stated that the agent “murdered” Good and accused President Donald Trump of bearing responsibility for her death.
Assaults on ICE agents surged by over 1,300% since Trump took office on Jan. 20, 2025, according to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). Vehicular attacks and death threats also rose by 3,200% and 8,000%.
All content created by the Daily Caller News Foundation, an independent and nonpartisan newswire service, is available without charge to any legitimate news publisher that can provide a large audience. All republished articles must include our logo, our reporter’s byline and their DCNF affiliation. For any questions about our guidelines or partnering with us, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org. 


